[IMP] l10n_fr: e-invoicing with Facturation électronique (#18395)
odoo/documentation: content/applications/finance/fiscal_localizations/france.rst

France
======

.. |DGFiP| replace:: :abbr:`DGFiP (Direction générale des Finances publiques)`

.. _localizations/france/configuration/modules:

Modules
=======

The following modules are installed automatically with the French localization:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 25 25 50

   * - Name
     - Technical name
     - Description
   * - :guilabel:`France - Accounting`
     - `l10n_fr_account`
     - French :ref:`fiscal localization package <fiscal_localizations/packages>` that applies only

>        to companies based in mainland France and doesn't include DOM-TOMs.

Reviewer: - 1) To remove the contraction
- 2) Shouldn't we maybe explain DOM-TOMs this time? (And maybe use the 'abbr' markup on other instances on this page, with 'Départements d’Outre-Mer et Territoires d’Outre-Mer'?) Something like:

```suggestion
       to companies based in mainland France and does not include DOM-TOMs (Départements d’Outre-Mer et Territoires d’Outre-Mer, i.e., France's overseas departments and territories).
```

On a related note, and just as an FYI: I also wanted to raise a question in the next team meeting about 1) for the fiscal localization page of countries with more than one national language, providing local language terms in multiple languages (e.g., names of laws, initiatives etc) and 2) how we should write foreign language terms ... like I see some on this page that are just in regular font, and I think they should be either in italics or with single/double quotes.

   * - :guilabel:`France - Accounting Reports`
     - `l10n_fr_reports`
     - Export of the French VAT report, which can be sent to DGFiP, an OGA, or a professional
       accountant.
   * - :guilabel:`France - VAT Anti-Fraud Certification for Point of Sale (CGI 286 I-3 bis)`
     - `l10n_fr_pos_cert`
     - :ref:`Point of Sale VAT anti-fraud certification

>        <localizations/france/vat-anti-fraud-certification>`.

Reviewer: Maybe it would be easier to read as:

```suggestion
     - :ref:`VAT anti-fraud certification <localizations/france/vat-anti-fraud-certification>` for points of sale.
```

   * - :guilabel:`France - E-Invoicing (Approved Platform)`

>      - (`l10n_fr_pdp`)

Reviewer: There's probably a reason why the technical name is between brackets ... can you help me understand?

     - Support for mandatory electronic invoicing in France to send and receive documents via
       the Odoo-approved platform.
   * - :guilabel:`France - E-reporting for POS`

>      - `l10n_fr_pdp_reports_pos`

Reviewer: I'm seeing this as the technical name of the 'France - E-reporting for POS' module:

<img width="343" height="137" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/032e223b-af42-4e46-8a74-6ddfd8bc7a95" />

   VAT-exempt transactions under Articles 261-261E are excluded.

.. _localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-config:

Configuration
*************

To activate the e-invoicing and e-reporting features, follow these configuration steps:

#. Make sure the :guilabel:`France - E-Invoicing (Approved Platform)` (`l10n_fr_pdp`) module is
   :doc:`installed </applications/general/apps_modules>`.
#. In the **Accounting** or **Invoicing** app, go to :menuselection:`Configuration --> Settings`,
   scroll down to the :guilabel:`French Electronic Invoicing` section, and click :guilabel:`Activate
   Electronic Invoicing`.
#. In the :guilabel:`Send via French electronic invoicing` window, fill in the :guilabel:`Email`
   field with the email address of a legal representative and click :guilabel:`Authenticate`:

   - In the pop-up window, click :guilabel:`Begin authentication`.
   - In the :guilabel:`Accessing the legal representatives of your company` window, click
     :guilabel:`Check status`, then select your name in the :guilabel:`Please select who you are`
     list, and :guilabel:`Confirm`.
   - To verify your identity, click :icon:`oi-launch` :guilabel:`Open authentication page`.

>    - In the :guilabel:`Authentication` window, click :guilabel:`Receive a code`. Then enter the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - In the :guilabel:`Authentication` window, click :guilabel:`Receive a code`, then enter the
```

     5-digit code received by email and :guilabel:`Confirm`.
   - In the :guilabel:`Identity verification` window, click :guilabel:`Next`.
   - To complete verification, click the :icon:`fa-plus` :guilabel:`(plus)` icon under
     :guilabel:`Add your document here` to upload a copy of your ID card, passport, or residence
     permit, then click :guilabel:`Next`.
   - To electronically sign the :guilabel:`Attestation de désignation de plateforme agréée`

>      (certificate of designation of an approved platform), click :guilabel:`Next` to review it. Then

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     (certificate of designation of an approved platform), click :guilabel:`Next` to review it, then
```

   number, enable the :guilabel:`Pilot Phase` option if you are configuring electronic invoicing
   before September 1, 2026, and click :guilabel:`Validate Registration`.
#. Your French e-invoicing ID is now ready to send and receive e-invoices and credit notes. Enable
   the following options, as needed:

   - :guilabel:`Incoming Invoices Journal`: Automatically set, update if necessary.
   - :guilabel:`Enable e-reporting & sending of invoices to the PPF`: Enable this option if
     e-reporting and e-invoicing are :ref:`required for your company
     <localizations/france/b2b-b2c>`.
   - :guilabel:`Participate in the pilot phase`: This option should only be enabled until the pilot
     phase ends on September 1, 2026.

     .. note::
        Changes to enable or disable this option will take effect the following day.

   - :guilabel:`E-Reporting Periodicity`: Set the periodicity of the :ref:`e-reporting
     <localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-reporting>`.

   Registration in the `annuaire de la facturation électronique (electronic invoicing directory)
   <https://facturation.chorus-pro.gouv.fr/annuaire/#/>`_ is effective the day after the

>    configuration is completed.

Reviewer: Should this maybe be aligned further to the left, so it's not part of point 6?

.. tip::
   To disconnect from the e-invoicing network, click :guilabel:`Remove from Approved Platform`.

.. important::
   Once registered on the e-invoicing network, users are automatically registered on Peppol. No
   separate Peppol registration is then needed.

.. _localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-contacts:

Contacts
^^^^^^^^

Before sending an e-invoice to a contact, make sure the contact is registered on the e-invoicing
network and ready to receive e-invoices. To do so, follow these steps:

#. In the **Accounting** or **Invoicing** app, go to :menuselection:`Customers --> Customers` and
   access the customer's form.
#. Make sure the customer's :guilabel:`Country` is set to `France`.
#. In the :guilabel:`Sales & Purchase` tab, under the :guilabel:`Misc` section, ensure the
   :guilabel:`Company ID` field is completed.

   .. note::
      The :guilabel:`France FRCTC Electronic Address` field, in the :guilabel:`Accounting tab`,
      under the :guilabel:`Customer Invoices` section, is then automatically filled in with the

>       :guilabel:`Company ID` number.

Reviewer: Maybe:

```suggestion
   .. note::
      The :guilabel:`Company ID` number is then automatically added in the :guilabel:`France FRCTC Electronic Address` field in the :guilabel:`Accounting tab`, under the :guilabel:`Customer Invoices` section.
```

   - Domestic B2B invoices that are paid in cash are also submitted to the tax authorities via
     :ref:`e-reporting <localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-reporting>`.

.. _localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-invoices:

Send customer invoices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Posted domestic B2B invoices to be sent via the e-invoicing network are marked as :guilabel:`Ready
to send` in the invoice's :guilabel:`E-invoicing Status` field.

.. note::
   All invoices that are ready to be sent via the e-invoicing network can be viewed in the
   following ways:

   - In the :guilabel:`Invoices` list view, use the :icon:`oi-settings-adjust` (:guilabel:`adjust
     settings`) button to add the :guilabel:`E-invoicing Status` column or apply the
     :guilabel:`E-Invoicing Ready` filter in the search bar.
   - In the Accounting dashboard, click :guilabel:`E-invoicing ready invoices` on the relevant sales
     journal.

Once an invoice is :ref:`created <accounting/invoice/creation>` and :ref:`confirmed
<accounting/invoice/confirmation>`, follow these steps to send the invoice to the customer via
the e-invoicing network:

> #. Check the :ref:`contact is registered on the e-invoicing network annuaire

Reviewer: Maybe we should use the same wording as earlier:

```suggestion
#. Check that the :ref:`contact is registered in the electronic invoicing directory
```

   <localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-contacts>`.
#. Make sure each invoice line includes at least one product or label, and exactly one tax.
#. To avoid selecting the sending method each time, verify that a :ref:`preferred method has been

>    set on the contact form <localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-contacts>`.

Reviewer: Would this be better as a tip along with 'Multiple invoices ...'?
And also, maybe that tip should be fully to the left (and not part of point 5)?

#. In the :guilabel:`Print & Send` window, make sure the :guilabel:`French E-Invoicing` option is
   enabled and click :guilabel:`Send`.

   .. tip::
      :ref:`Multiple invoices <accounting/invoice/sending-multiple-invoices>` can also be sent in
      batches via the e-invoicing network.

In the :guilabel:`French Invoicing Info` section of the :guilabel:`Other Info` tab, the
:guilabel:`E-Invoicing Status` is updated to :guilabel:`Done` once the invoices have been
successfully delivered to the contact’s approved platform.

.. note::
   - The invoice delivery status is also displayed in the :guilabel:`E-Invoicing Status` column of
     the :guilabel:`Invoices` list view.
   - If an error occurs during the tax authority's delivery of the invoice, the error details are
     displayed in the invoice's chatter.

.. tip::
   To manually trigger the scheduled action used to check the delivery status of invoices, go to the
   Accounting dashboard and click :guilabel:`Fetch E-invoicing Status` on the corresponding sales
   journal.

.. important::
   For domestic B2B invoices, the :guilabel:`Reset to Draft` option is not available for invoices

>    that have already been sent via the :ref:`e-reporting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   that have already been sent via :ref:`e-reporting
```

- :ref:`E-invoicing <localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-einvoicing>`: Issue and receive
  invoices in electronic format.
- :ref:`E-reporting <localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-reporting>`: Submit transaction and
  payment data to |DGFiP|.

Odoo is officially certified as an approved platform (plateforme agréée) for issuing electronic
invoices. It supports the receipt of various formats (Facture-X, UBL, and CII), while sending
documents exclusively in UBL format.

.. note::
   VAT-exempt transactions under Articles 261-261E are excluded.

.. _localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-config:

Configuration
*************

To send and receive invoices via Facturation électronique, the following configuration is required:

#. Make sure the :guilabel:`France - E-Invoicing (Approved Platform)` (`l10n_fr_pdp`) module is
   :doc:`installed </applications/general/apps_modules>`.
#. Go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Configuration --> Settings`, or :menuselection:`Invoicing
   --> Configuration --> Settings`, scroll down to the :guilabel:`French Electronic Invoicing`
   section, and click :guilabel:`Activate Electronic Invoicing`.

> #. In the :guilabel:`Send via French electronic invoicing` window, fill in the :guilabel:`Email`

Reviewer 2: Email of a legal representative

   field and click :guilabel:`Authenticate`:

   - In the pop-up window, click :guilabel:`Begin authentication`.
   - In the :guilabel:`Accessing the legal representatives of your company` window, click
     :guilabel:`Check status`.

>    - In the :guilabel:`Please select who you are` window, select your name, and :guilabel:`Confirm`.

Reviewer 2: In the same page as 'accessing the legal representatives of your company'

   - To verify your identity, click :icon:`oi-launch` :guilabel:`Open authentication page`.
   - To complete verification, click the :icon:`fa-plus` :guilabel:`(plus)` icon under
     :guilabel:`Add your document here` to upload a copy of your ID, passport, or residence permit,
     then click :guilabel:`Continue`.
   - To electronically sign the :guilabel:`Attestation de désignation de plateforme agréée`
     (Certificate of designation as an approved platform), click :guilabel:`Continue` to review it.
     Then click :guilabel:`Continue` again and enable both options:

>      - XXX

Reviewer 2: "Je reconnais avoir pris connaissance de l'ensemble des documents"

>      - XXX

Reviewer 2: "J'accepte les conditions générales d'utilisation de VIALINK 360 et du certificat de signature"

   - Once the signature is confirmed, the signed attestation and terms and conditions can be
     downloaded, if needed.
   - Authentication is then successful, and the page can be closed.

#. In the :guilabel:`Send via French electronic invoicing` window, click :guilabel:`Refresh`.
#. Verify that the :guilabel:`Identifier` field is filled in with your :abbr:`SIREN (Système
   d'identification du répertoire des entreprises, Business Directory Identification System)`
   number, enable the :guilabel:`Pilot Phase` option, and click :guilabel:`Validate Registration`.
#. Your French e-invoicing ID can now send and receive invoices and credit notes:

   - :guilabel:`Incoming Invoices Journal`: Automatically set, update if necessary.
   - :guilabel:`Enable e-reporting & sending of invoices to the PPF`: Enable this option if
     e-reporting and e-invoicing are required for your company.

>    - :guilabel:`Participate in the pilot phase`: Enable the option.

Reviewer 2: Only before 01/09 (or we can change the doc at that time, as you want)

   - :guilabel:`E-Reporting Periodicity`: Set the periodicity of the :ref:`E-reporting
     <localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-reporting>`.

.. tip::
   - Registration in the `electronic invoicing directory (annuaire)
     <https://facturation.chorus-pro.gouv.fr/annuaire/authentification/connexion>`_ is effective the
     day after it's completed.

>    - To disconnect from Peppol and Facturation électronique, click :guilabel:`Disconnect Peppol`.

Reviewer 2: It's now automatic if the new module is installed, there is an option call "complete your registration" that disconnect the old peppol endpoint and launch the new flow KYC/KYB

.. important::
   - Businesses that are already registered on Peppol must also register separately on Facturation

>      électronique, as the two platforms are distinct.

Reviewer 2: to remove (cf earlier comment)

   - Once registered on Facturation électronique, users are automatically registered on Peppol. No
     separate Peppol registration is then needed.

.. _localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-contacts:

Contacts
^^^^^^^^

Before sending an invoice to a contact using Facturation électronique, make sure the contact is
registered as a Facturation électronique participant. To do so, follow these steps:

#. Go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Customers --> Customers`, or :menuselection:`Invoicing -->
   Customers --> Customers` and access the customer's form.

> #. In the :guilabel:`Sales & Purchase` tab, make sure the :guilabel:`Company ID` field is completed

Reviewer 2: and country == FR

   in the :guilabel:`Misc` section.

   .. note::
      In the :guilabel:`Accounting tab`, the :guilabel:`France FRCTC Electronic Ad` field is then
      automatically filled in with the :guilabel:`Company ID` number.

#. To verify the contact, click :guilabel:`Verify`. Its :guilabel:`French E-invoicing State` is
   marked as :guilabel:`Partner is in the annuaire` if the contact is found on the Facturation
   électronique network.

.. _localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-einvoicing:

> E-invoicing with Facturation électronique

Reviewer 2: Only for B2B France-France
B2B international and B2C don't follow the step of this section

   Facturation électronique annuaire.
#. Click :guilabel:`Send` on the confirmed invoice form.
#. In the :guilabel:`Print & Send` window, make sure the :guilabel:`French E-Invoicing` option is
   enabled and click :guilabel:`Send`.

   .. tip::
      - :ref:`Multiple invoices <accounting/invoice/sending-multiple-invoices>` can also be sent in
        batches via Facturation électronique.
      - Set the preferred :ref:`Invoice sending <accounting/invoice/sending>` method for a customer
        to :guilabel:`French E-Invoicing` in the :guilabel:`Customer Invoices` section of the
        customer form's :guilabel:`Accounting` tab.

In the :guilabel:`French Invoicing Info` section of the :guilabel:`Other Info` tab, the
:guilabel:`E-Invoicing Status` is updated to :guilabel:`Done` once the invoices have been
successfully delivered to the contact’s approved platform.

.. note::
   - Alternatively, the :guilabel:`E-Invoicing Status` column also displays the invoice delivery
     status in the :guilabel:`Invoices` list view.
   - For B2C or B2B international invoices, if an error occurs during delivery to the contact's

>      approved platform, the error details are displayed in the invoice's chatter.

Reviewer 2: Nothing here, it's only for e-Reporting

> E-Invoicing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
E-invoicing
```

-----------

.. _localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec:

> Facturation électronique

Reviewer: Since, in the French translation of the page, you already have **Comptabilité > Facturation électronique**, I think it will seem odd to have yet another **Facturation électronique** underneath, no?

<img width="347" height="381" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/0d00fad0-725e-493f-ae6c-62a74ca681f7" />

So I think you need to have a different heading here. My suggestion would be something like this, for the  new section and the existing Chorus Pro section:

<img width="333" height="344" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e35c9cf6-4c3a-4d4f-8036-6ece9f1572f7" />

(With or without the Chorus Pro in the heading.)

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Starting September 1, 2026, `electronic invoicing
<https://www.impots.gouv.fr/professionnel/je-passe-la-facturation-electronique>`_ with Facturation
électronique will become mandatory in France. From this date, all VAT-registered companies must
receive electronic invoices via certified platforms. The requirements for issuing invoices will be
phased in:

- Large enterprises (GE) and mid-sized enterprises (ETI) will be expected to start issuing
  electronic invoices on September 1, 2026.
- Small and medium-sized enterprises (PME) and micro-enterprises will have until September 1, 2027,
  to meet these requirements.

> For all VAT-taxable B2B transactions in France, affected businesses must:

Reviewer: I think this might be misleading, because the e-reporting also extends to B2C, from what I understand.

- :ref:`E-invoicing <localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-einvoicing>`: Issue and receive
  invoices in electronic format.
- :ref:`E-reporting <localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-reporting>`: Submit transaction and
  payment data to |DGFiP|.

Odoo is officially certified as an approved platform (plateforme agréée) for issuing electronic
invoices. It supports the receipt of various formats (Facture-X, UBL, and CII), while sending

> documents exclusively in UBL format.

Reviewer: I think we can be more concise with this, while at the same time being a bit more clear on the timing:

```suggestion
France's `electronic invoicing reform <https://www.impots.gouv.fr/professionnel/je-passe-la-facturation-electronique>`_ *(reforme de la facturation électronique)* impacts all VAT-registered French companies, and is being rolled out in two phases:

- From **September 1, 2026**:

  - every company must be able to receive domestic B2B e-invoices via *plateformes agréées* (approved
    platforms) :ref:`(e-invoicing) <localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-einvoicing>`
  - large enterprises (GE) and mid-sized enterprises (ETI) must send domestic B2B e-invoices :ref:`(e-
    invoicing) <localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-einvoicing>` and must submit data to the tax authorities
    about certain operations, such as B2C and cross-border B2B operations :ref:`(e-reporting)
    <localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-reporting>`

- From **September 1, 2027**, every company, including small and medium-sized enterprises (PME) and
  micro-enterprises are subject to the same :ref:`e-invoicing <localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-
  invoicing>` and :ref:`e-reporting <localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-reporting>` requirements

Odoo is officially certified as a *plateforme agréée* (approved platform) on the e-invoicing network. It supports the receipt of documents in various formats (Facture-X, UBL, and CII) and the sending of documents exclusively in UBL format.
```

On a related note, even on a screenshot shared by the PO, it mentions ' ... on the [French] e-invoicing network', so I really do think that wording could work:

<img width="1044" height="267" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7d11a1c0-50ad-48f0-9d4d-cb072085c9b8" />

.. note::
   VAT-exempt transactions under Articles 261-261E are excluded.

.. _localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-config:

Configuration
*************

> To send and receive invoices via Facturation électronique, the following configuration is required:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To send and receive domestic B2B invoices via the e-invoicing network, the following configuration is required:
```

#. Make sure the :guilabel:`France - E-Invoicing (Approved Platform)` (`l10n_fr_pdp`) module is
   :doc:`installed </applications/general/apps_modules>`.
#. Go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Configuration --> Settings`, or :menuselection:`Invoicing
   --> Configuration --> Settings`, scroll down to the :guilabel:`French Electronic Invoicing`

>    section, and click :guilabel:`Activate Electronic Invoicing`.

Reviewer: In a recent Belgium localization PR by Tom, we were discussing how best to write these paths to avoid confusion over the fact that there's also an 'Accounting' menu in the Accounting app ... were you there when we were talking about it? I don't remember! Since it's a common issue across many apps (having a menu of the same name _withing_ the app), we thought it would be good to bring it up at the next team meeting so see if we can agree on a way to do this consistently.

But basically, the decision for Tom's was to start with "In the Accounting app, go to ..." (but then, in this case, it probably makes sense to take the same approach for the Invoicing app)

```suggestion
#. In the **Accounting** app, go to :menuselection:`Configuration --> Settings`, or, in the **Invoicing** app, go to :menuselection:`Configuration --> Settings`, scroll down to the :guilabel:`French Electronic Invoicing`
   section, and click :guilabel:`Activate Electronic Invoicing`.
```

Same comment for other times we provide a path.

#. In the :guilabel:`Send via French electronic invoicing` window, fill in the :guilabel:`Email`
   field with the email address of a legal representative and click :guilabel:`Authenticate`:

   - In the pop-up window, click :guilabel:`Begin authentication`.
   - In the :guilabel:`Accessing the legal representatives of your company` window, click
     :guilabel:`Check status`, then select your name in the :guilabel:`Please select who you are`
     list, and :guilabel:`Confirm`.
   - To verify your identity, click :icon:`oi-launch` :guilabel:`Open authentication page`.
   - In the :guilabel:`Authentication` window, click :guilabel:`Receive a code`. Then enter the
     5-digit code received by email and :guilabel:`Confirm`.
   - In the :guilabel:`Identity verification` window, click :guilabel:`Next`.
   - To complete verification, click the :icon:`fa-plus` :guilabel:`(plus)` icon under

>      :guilabel:`Add your document here` to upload a copy of your ID, passport, or residence permit,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     :guilabel:`Add your document here` to upload a copy of your ID card, passport, or residence permit,
```

     then click :guilabel:`Next`.
   - To electronically sign the :guilabel:`Attestation de désignation de plateforme agréée`

>      (Certificate of designation as an approved platform), click :guilabel:`Next` to review it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - To electronically sign the :guilabel:`Attestation de désignation de plateforme agréée`
     (certificate of designation of an approved platform), click :guilabel:`Next` to review it.
```

I think '... _of_ an approved platform' is more correct here, since Odoo is already a PA, and they're just signing to say they have designed a PA, and that their PA is Odoo. (Not explaining myself super well, but ... 'as' would only make sense if it was: certificate of designation of Odoo as approved platform)

     Then click :guilabel:`Next` again and enable both options:

     - :guilabel:`I acknowledge having read all the documents`.
     - :guilabel:`I accept the general conditions of use of VIALNIK 360 and the signature
       certificate`.

   - Click :guilabel:`Sign`.
   - Once the signature is confirmed, the signed attestation and terms and conditions can be
     downloaded, if needed.

>    - Authentication is then successful, and the page can be closed.

Reviewer: I would maybe not have these as sub-bullets, since they're not steps like the others. What do you think?

#. In the :guilabel:`Send via French electronic invoicing` window, click :guilabel:`Refresh`.
#. Verify that the :guilabel:`Identifier` field is filled in with your :abbr:`SIREN (Système
   d'identification du répertoire des entreprises, Business Directory Identification System)`

>    number, enable the :guilabel:`Pilot Phase` option, and click :guilabel:`Validate Registration`.

Reviewer: About enabling the pilot phase option:

1) Can they use this before 1 September without taking part in the pilot phase?
2) Should we be saying something like '... enable the Pilot Phase option if you are configuring electronic invoicing before September 1, 2026, and ...'?

> #. Your French e-invoicing ID can now send and receive invoices and credit notes:

Reviewer: This is the first time we're mentioning 'credit notes' ... any particular reason why to mention it here? Or maybe it's just kind of implicit and doesn't need to be mentioned.

```suggestion
#. Your French e-invoicing ID is now ready to send and receive e-invoices:
```

(Maybe saying 'ready to ...' is nice, because later we talk about checking that the counterparty is 'ready to receive ...')

   - :guilabel:`Incoming Invoices Journal`: Automatically set, update if necessary.
   - :guilabel:`Enable e-reporting & sending of invoices to the PPF`: Enable this option if

>      e-reporting and e-invoicing are required for your company.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - :guilabel:`Enable e-reporting & sending of invoices to the PPF`: Enable this option if
     e-reporting and e-invoicing are currently mandatory for your company.
```

I asked you about this, and it was clearer to me (companies who are obliged vs those who just want to get a headstart), but ... is this only really applicable _after_ September 1? If a user from any kind of company is doing this configuration on, let's say 1 July 2026, their company technically isn't required to meet the e-invoicing or e-reporting requirements yet, right?

   - :guilabel:`Participate in the pilot phase`: This option should only be enabled until the pilot
     phase ends on September 1, 2026.

     .. note::
        Changes to enable or disable this option will take effect the following day.

>    - :guilabel:`E-Reporting Periodicity`: Set the periodicity of the :ref:`E-reporting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - :guilabel:`E-Reporting Periodicity`: Set the periodicity of the :ref:`e-reporting
```

>    - :guilabel:`E-Reporting Periodicity`: Set the periodicity of the :ref:`E-reporting

Reviewer: It's still not super clear to me _where_ these options appear. But maybe a little lead-in sentence would be good, e.g., 'Enable the following options, as needed:'

     <localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-reporting>`.

.. tip::
   - Registration in the `electronic invoicing directory (annuaire)
     <https://facturation.chorus-pro.gouv.fr/annuaire/authentification/connexion>`_ is effective the

>      day after it's completed.

Reviewer: I keep having issues with the current link, but the following one works for me:

https://facturation.chorus-pro.gouv.fr/annuaire/#/

```suggestion
   - Registration in the `annuaire de la facturation électronique (electronic invoicing directory) <https://facturation.chorus-pro.gouv.fr/annuaire/#/>`_ is effective the day after the configuration is completed.
```

(Annoying we can't combine italics with other rst markup like links or guilabels!)

>      day after it's completed.

Reviewer: I think this is the first time you mention the annuaire, right?
Is it more that, after following steps 1-6, the company is now registered in the annuaire? So maybe you need to add that as a kind of 'result' after the steps, rather than as a tip?

>    - To disconnect from Facturation électronique, click :guilabel:`Remove from Approved Platform`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - To disconnect from the _platforme agréée_, and as a result, from the e-invoicing network, click :guilabel:`Remove from Approved Platform`.
```

.. important::
   Once registered on Facturation électronique, users are automatically registered on Peppol. No

>    separate Peppol registration is then needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Once registered on the e-invoicing network, users are automatically registered on Peppol. No
   separate Peppol registration is then needed.
```

.. _localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-contacts:

Contacts
^^^^^^^^

Before sending an invoice to a contact using Facturation électronique, make sure the contact is

> registered as a Facturation électronique participant. To do so, follow these steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before attempting to send an e-invoice to a contact, make sure the contact is registered on the e-invoicing network and ready to receive e-invoices. To do so, follow these steps:
```

#. Go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Customers --> Customers`, or :menuselection:`Invoicing -->

>    Customers --> Customers` and access the customer's form.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. In the **Accounting** app or the **Invoicing** app, go to :menuselection:`Customers --> Customers` and select the customer.
```

#. Make sure the customer's :guilabel:`Country` is set to `France`.
#. In the :guilabel:`Sales & Purchase` tab, ensure the :guilabel:`Company ID` field is completed in

>    the :guilabel:`Misc` section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. In the :guilabel:`Sales & Purchase` tab, in the :guilabel:`Misc` section, ensure the :guilabel:`Company ID` field is completed.
```

Maybe better to first guide them to the right section, rather than tell them the field before the section?

   .. note::
      In the :guilabel:`Accounting tab`, the :guilabel:`France FRCTC Electronic Ad` field is then

>       automatically filled in with the :guilabel:`Company ID` number.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      In the :guilabel:`Accounting tab`, the :guilabel:`France FRCTC Electronic Address` field is then
      automatically filled in with the :guilabel:`Company ID` number.
```

Basing myself on this: 

<img width="379" height="145" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/94fa279c-9a81-41ff-9f9e-e9ae98d15eb7" />

#. To verify the contact, click :guilabel:`Verify`. Its :guilabel:`French E-invoicing State` is
   marked as :guilabel:`Partner is in the annuaire` if the contact is found on the Facturation

>    électronique network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. To verify the contact's :guilabel:`E-invoicing State`, click the :guilabel:`Verify` button. If the contact is found on the e-invoicing network, :guilabel:`Partner is in the annuaire` is shown.
```

Right now, it's kind of implicit that the user should be in the Accounting tab here, but maybe that could be missed? Could be clearer about that? Or ... maybe you could not have the tip, and instead, include that info as the start of step 4?

And ... maybe remove the 'Its French E-invoicing State ...' from the step, and add it as a standalone sentence after? Since it's more the final result, rather than part of a step, if you see what I mean? (like you've done in the section 'Send customer invoices')

.. _localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-einvoicing:

> E-invoicing with Facturation électronique

Reviewer: ```suggestion
E-invoicing
```

*****************************************

To use Facturation électronique for e-invoicing:

- B2B invoices (French company to French company): :ref:`Send customer invoices
  <localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-invoices>` directly via Facturation électronique.
- B2C or B2B international invoices: Once confirmed, these invoices are submitted to Facturation
  électronique through :ref:`E-reporting <localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-reporting>`.

.. note::
   B2B invoices (French company to French company) that are paid in cash are also submitted to
   Facturation électronique through :ref:`E-reporting

>    <localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-reporting>`.

Reviewer: Suggestion to make the main text only about the e-invoices that can be sent via this e-invoicing network, with all the e-reporting points grouped in a note:

```suggestion
E-invoices for domestic B2B operations can be :ref:`sent 
<localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-invoices>` and :ref:`received 
<localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-bills>` via the e-invoicing network.

.. note::
   - B2C invoices or cross-border B2B invoices cannot be issued via the e-invoicing network. However,
     However, once confirmed in Odoo, these invoices are submitted to the tax authorities via
     :ref:`e-reporting <localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-reporting>`.
   - Domestic B2B invoices that are paid in cash are also submitted to the tax authorities via
     :ref:`e-reporting <localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-reporting>`.
```

.. _localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-invoices:

Send customer invoices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Posted B2B invoices (French company to French company) to be sent via Facturation électronique are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Posted domestic B2B invoices be sent via the e-invoicing network are
```

marked as :guilabel:`Ready to send` in the invoice's :guilabel:`E-invoicing Status` field.

.. note::
   All invoices that are ready to be sent via Facturation électronique can be viewed in the

>    following ways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   All invoices that are ready to be sent via the e-invoicing network can be viewed in the
   following ways:
```

   - In the :guilabel:`Invoices` list view, use the :icon:`oi-settings-adjust` (:guilabel:`adjust
     settings`) button to add the :guilabel:`E-invoicing Status` column or apply the
     :guilabel:`E-Invoicing Ready` filter in the search bar.
   - In the Accounting dashboard, click :guilabel:`E-invoicing ready invoices` on the relevant sales
     journal.

Once an invoice is :ref:`created <accounting/invoice/creation>` and :ref:`confirmed
<accounting/invoice/confirmation>`, follow these steps to send the invoice to the customer via

> Facturation électronique:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once an invoice is :ref:`created <accounting/invoice/creation>` and :ref:`confirmed
<accounting/invoice/confirmation>`, follow these steps to send the invoice to the customer via
the e-invoicing network:
```

#. Click on the customer's name on the invoice to open the customer form, and click the
   :guilabel:`Accounting tab` to verify in the :guilabel:`Customer invoices` section that the
   :ref:`contact <localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-contacts>` is registered in the

>    Facturation électronique annuaire.

Reviewer: As discussed, for step 1, maybe just a more brief 'Check the contact is on the e-invoicing network' step and direct them to the Contacts section above?

#. Click :guilabel:`Send` on the confirmed invoice form.
#. In the :guilabel:`Print & Send` window, make sure the :guilabel:`French E-Invoicing` option is
   enabled and click :guilabel:`Send`.

   .. tip::
      - :ref:`Multiple invoices <accounting/invoice/sending-multiple-invoices>` can also be sent in

>         batches via Facturation électronique.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - :ref:`Multiple invoices <accounting/invoice/sending-multiple-invoices>` can be sent in
        batches via the e-invoicing network.
```

      - Set the preferred :ref:`Invoice sending <accounting/invoice/sending>` method for a customer
        to :guilabel:`French E-Invoicing` in the :guilabel:`Customer Invoices` section of the

>         customer form's :guilabel:`Accounting` tab.

Reviewer: Maybe this belongs more in the section on checking if a contact is set up for e-invoicing?

In the :guilabel:`French Invoicing Info` section of the :guilabel:`Other Info` tab, the
:guilabel:`E-Invoicing Status` is updated to :guilabel:`Done` once the invoices have been
successfully delivered to the contact’s approved platform.

.. note::
   - Alternatively, the :guilabel:`E-Invoicing Status` column also displays the invoice delivery

>      status in the :guilabel:`Invoices` list view.

Reviewer: Suggestion:

```suggestion
   - The invoice delivery status is also displayed in the :guilabel:`E-Invoicing Status` column of the :guilabel:`Invoices` list view.
```

   - If an error occurs during the tax authority's delivery of the invoice, the error details are
     displayed in the invoice's chatter.

.. tip::

>    To manually trigger the scheduled action used to check the invoices' status, go to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   To manually trigger the scheduled action used to check the delivery status of invoices, go to the
```

   Accounting dashboard and click :guilabel:`Fetch E-invoicing Status` on the corresponding sales
   journal.

.. important::
   For B2B invoices (French company to French company), the :guilabel:`Reset to Draft` option is not
   available for invoices that have already been sent via the :ref:`E-reporting

>    <localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-reporting>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   For domestic B2B invoices, the :guilabel:`Reset to Draft` option is not available for invoices that have already been sent via :ref:`e-reporting <localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-reporting>`.
```

.. _localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-bills:

Receive vendor bills
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

New documents received via Facturation électronique are checked multiple times a day. Documents
received are automatically imported into the purchase journal set in the :guilabel:`Incoming
Invoices Journal` section during configuration, and corresponding vendor bills are created as drafts
and appear in the vendor bills list view. Access the vendor bill and click one of the following

> options:

Reviewer: Can you explain this to me when we meet in person? I'm a bit confused about the 'received documents' and the 'draft vendor bills' due to my lack of Odoo accounting knowledge!

Do you mean something like:

```suggestion
Odoo checks for new documents received via the e-invoicing network multiple times a day, and automatically imports invoices into the purchase journal set in the :guilabel:`Incoming Invoices Journal` section during configuration. Corresponding vendor bills are created as drafts and appear in the vendor bills list view. 

Open a vendor bill and click one of the following options:
```

- :guilabel:`Confirm`: To confirm the vendor bill.
- :guilabel:`Cancel`: In the :guilabel:`Send Response` window, fill in the following fields, then
  click :guilabel:`Send`:

  - :guilabel:`Reason Code`: Select the reason why the vendor bill should be cancelled.
  - :guilabel:`Enter an optional note here`: fill in a message to be sent to the vendor to explain

>     why the vendor bill is refused, if needed.

Reviewer: Maybe:

```suggestion
- :guilabel:`Cancel`: To refuse the vendor bill. In the :guilabel:`Send Response` window, fill in the following fields, then click :guilabel:`Send`:

  - :guilabel:`Reason Code`: Select the reason why you are refusing the vendor bill.
  - :guilabel:`Enter an optional note here`: Add a message to explain your refusal to the vendor, if desired.
```

.. tip::
   To manually trigger the scheduled action to retrieve incoming Facturation électronique documents,
   go to the Accounting dashboard and click :guilabel:`Fetch E-invoicing Documents` on the main

>    Facturation électronique purchase journal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   To manually trigger the scheduled action to retrieve incoming invoices, go to the Accounting dashboard and click :guilabel:`Fetch E-invoicing Documents` on the purchase journal.
```

.. _localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-reporting:

> E-Reporting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
E-reporting
```

***********

An automated scheduled action submits an XML report with transaction and payment data to |DGFiP|
every ten days. This XML report also includes information on :ref:`confirmed
<accounting/invoice/confirmation>` B2C, B2B international, and B2B paid-in-cash invoices.

To view e-reports and their submission status, go to :menuselection:`Accounting --> Reporting -->

> E-reporting`:

Reviewer: I think we could do with a bit of an intro to e-reporting, in terms of which kind of operations fall under its scope. Here is my suggestion:

```suggestion
E-reporting consists of the submission of transaction and payment data to the tax authorities about
:ref:`confirmed <accounting/invoice/confirmation>` B2C invoices, cross-border B2B invoices, as well
as domestic B2B invoices paid in cash. Every ten days, Odoo automatically submits an XML report with this data to the tax authorities. 

To view e-reports and their submission status, in the **Accounting** app, go to :menuselection:`Reporting -->
E-reporting`. E-reports have one of the following statuses:
```

- :guilabel:`Ready`: Ready for submission.
- :guilabel:`Error`: Submission failed, the e-report will be re-submitted in 5-7 days.
- :guilabel:`Sent`: Submitted, awaiting confirmation.
- :guilabel:`Completed`: Successfully processed.

.. tip::
   - To manually trigger the scheduled action, access the relevant e-reporting transaction in the

>      :guilabel:`E-Reporting` list view and click :guilabel:`Send`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - To manually trigger the scheduled action used to send e-reporting, open the relevant e-report from the  :guilabel:`E-Reporting` list view and click :guilabel:`Send`.
```

>    - To display the list of invoices or payments included in an e-reporting transaction, click the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - To display the list of invoices or payments included in an e-report, click the
```

     :guilabel:`Invoices` or :guilabel:`Payments` smart button, then click the
     :icon:`fa-caret-right` :guilabel:`(right arrow)` icon to display the list.

.. important::
   For B2C, B2B international, and B2B paid-in-cash invoices, if an invoice previously sent in
   :ref:`E-reporting <localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-reporting>` needs to be reset to
   draft for corrections, the E-reporting correction will be sent when the draft invoice is

>    confirmed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   For B2C invoices, cross-border B2B invoices, and domestic B2B invoices paid in cash, if an invoice previously sent via :ref:`e-reporting <localizations/france/e-invoicing-fac-elec-reporting>` needs to be reset to
   draft for corrections, the e-reporting correction is sent when the draft invoice is confirmed.
```
